# **MitoCall: a versatile pipeline for mitochondrial variant calling from high throughput single cell bisulfite sequencing data**


Amanda F C Lopes^1,2

**Affiliations:**
1: Department of Clinical Neurosciences, School of Clinical Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Cambridge, CB2 0QQ, UK

2: Medical Research Council - Mitochondrial Biology Unit, University of Cambridge, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Cambridge, CB2 0XY, UK



## Abstract

Clinical phenotypes of patients suffering from mitochondrial diseases are multifaceted and heterogeneous, even when the same mitochondrial DNA mutations are involved(1). Research suggests that one culprit for this diversity may be epigenetics and its interaction with mitochondrial genomics (2,3).

Multi-omics has allowed for the investigation of multiple features of bulk and single cells. Yet, omics integrating epigenetics and genetics are limited. While several bioinformatic pipelines for investigating mitochondrial DNA parameters do exist, none take into consideration the usage of DNA sequencing data produced after bisulfite treatment which is often employed for the study of DNA methylation, thus allowing interrogation of the interaction between epigenetics and mitochondrial DNA. 

Here we present MitoCall, a scalable and versatile pipeline for the analysis of mitochondrial DNA parameters. MitoCall reliably identifies and quantifies heteroplasmic variants using multiple quality controls including removing PCR duplicates to ensure both strand support, setting thresholds for mapping, base
and variant calling, and defining a minimum read count before determining heteroplasmic fractions. In addition, the workflow of MitoCall allows for parallel computation of multiple samples and usage on data from humans and mice. The output is reported in easy-to-handle tables facilitating further data visualisation steps.

*Availability*
The MitoCall pipeline is available on GitHub (https://github.com/afclopes/BSseq-mtDNAhet-main_V2).










## Introduction
Over the last decade, advances in epigenomics brought forward the development of multiple techniques to assay DNA methylation(4). Adaptations to the experimental process and bioinformatics pipelines, together with decreasing costs of sequencing, and increasing genetic information per sample, have gradually reduced the effort required for the study of epigenetics, increasing its accessibility to researchers(5). With progress, comes the opportunity to expand the scope of novel investigations, broadening epigenetic studies to also encompass transcriptomic and genomic information, and refining bulk studies to single cell investigations.
DNA methylation has been found to be associated with multiple diseases and health conditions, including mitochondrial disorders; for example, as numerous studies highlight the role that mitochondrial metabolites play in this epigenetic factor (reviewed in (3)). However, these correlations are derived from bulk samples, and direct correlation to mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) variables are still lacking.
Bioinformatics pipelines have started to allow for the measurement and quantification of mtDNA parameters, including heteroplasmy, like MToolBox (6), mtDNA-Server (7) and mity (8), and copy number, such as fastMitoCalc (9), or both, e.g. MitoSeek (10), from whole genome sequencing data. This raises the question of whether other types of sequencing data can also be used for querying mitochondrial genomics.
Here we address this gap, and present MitoCall, a versatile, yet strict open-source bioinformatics pipeline for computing variant calling for mitochondrial DNA from high-throughput single cell bisulfite sequencing data. This tool was developed to assist in identifying mitochondrial heteroplasmic variants, ultimately generating a highly interpretable report in a Variant Call Format (VCF) file with metadata information, and a final table in tab-separated values (TSV) format facilitating further data analysis. This pipeline can be easily integrated into an existing workflow analysis for the detection of nuclear DNA methylation, allowing for the direct correlation between epigenetics (in this case DNA methylation) with mitochondrial genetics, e.g. heteroplasmy.
MitoCall creates for the first time the opportunity to start investigating whether mtDNA genetics (for example, mtDNA variants, mutational burden, and heteroplasmies) influence DNA methylation. This tool creates the possibility to study whether DNA methylation might play a role in varying mitochondrial disease penetrance and the differing clinical phenotypes observed in mitochondrial disease patients. Hence, the ultimate goal of MitoCall is to improve diagnosis and prognosis for these patients.

### Design and function
MitoCall is divided into three main processes: 1) aligning and extracting mitochondrial sequences from bisulfite sequencing data, 2) calling variants and processing outputted VCF files, and 3) computing heteroplasmy levels while accounting for quality controls. This pipeline has been optimised for bisulfite sequencing data produced with the latest scBS-seq technique (11), which uses of a post-bisulfite adaptor tagging protocol (as opposed to tagging before treatment) and multiple rounds of random primer amplification, and processes data sequenced with Illumina HiSeq2000 or higher.
The MitoCall default quality control parameters and other variables were optimized with in silico experimentation, but users are able to adapt these parameters, and specify the reference genome to fit their use-case.

### Method overview
MitoCall accepts as input raw data files in FASTQ format (paired-ended to allow for both strand support) (Figure 1). The tool Trim Galore! is employed in order to remove adapters, by default clipping 9 base pairs. Reads are mapped to the reference genome of choice (this tool has been tested using the human genome GRCh38.p13 and the mouse C57BL/6J genome GRCm38.p6). The alignment is carried out with the commonly used bismark (12) tool, which employs the Bowtie2 aligner. This is particularly important for processing small fragmented DNA (100-150 bp), and DNA sequences that have been modified during bisulfite treatment. The pipeline default is set to account for only unique reads, to avoid the risk of including nuclear-mitochondrial sequences (NUMTs), which are nuclear sequences sharing high similarity with mtDNA (13). The resultant BAM file is further processed with bcftools (14) to compute variant calling and produce a VCF file (Figure 1). This, in turn, is further processed to select only mitochondrial DNA and only data that is of interest from the VCF file, such as base position, reference base, possible alternative base, quality of called bases, and the number of high-quality reference forward, reference reverse, alternative forward and alternative reverse bases. In this case, alternative base is considered any base that does not match with the base found in the reference genome for that same position. 
Subsequently, the pipeline leads to a final step in Python, where the base quality and the number of reads are used for quality controls, and where heteroplasmies are computed.

### Computing heteroplasmy
Data produced with scBS-seq require the samples to be bisulfite treated. As such, every cytosine which is not methylated will be converted into a thymidine(12). Consequently, bases that are mutated to a thymine could also appear due to conversion from a cytosine, hence some mutations could be masked with bases that have undergone bisulfite treatment. However, differential patterns of alternative bases on either or both strands can be used to determine whether a base is different due to bisulfite treatment or mutation.
Predicting these patterns allows for the estimation of whether methylation, mutation or both has taken place. A list of these patterns (Supplementary Figure 1) and their outcomes (summarised in Supplementary Table 1) was compiled presenting every possible base change, mutation and methylated state, and the potential reads recorded for each option in the forward and reverse strands matching the reference and alternative base.

### Quality controls
Multiple quality control steps were integrated into the pipeline to ensure reliability and reproducibility of the results (Table 1). The thresholds for quality control detailed below serve as empirically optimised defaults but can be adjusted by the user. In order to reduce experimental artifacts, PCR duplicates are removed. This is followed by a threshold of mapping quality that for this tool is set at 20, and a threshold of base calling quality that is set to 30, which are standard thresholds and have been used in other studies (7,8,10). Since the tool is intended for measuring mitochondrial DNA, using bcftools, multiallelic variant calling are carried out instead of biallelic, and subsequently left-alignment normalisation is included to improve the alignments of the mapped reads (15). Once the VCF file is generated, it is further processed in Python, where base positions that register fewer than 5 total reads or fewer than 5 alternative reads are removed to assure that there are enough read data to reliably calculate heteroplasmy. This cut off point of 5 reads has also been used in other tools(6). Lastly, a variant calling quality threshold is also used and is set to a value of 20 to ensure high confidence variant calling. 

### Parallel computing with MitoCall
Since the purpose of this tool is to calculate mtDNA heteroplasmies from sequencing data which will also be used for DNA methylation analysis, the sequence which is aligned and processed until the step which produces the VCF file, includes nuclear and mitochondrial sequences. Due to this, and depending on the size of the sample being used, the alignment and variant calling can take many hours or even days to complete. Hence, this pipeline has been tested running multiple samples in parallel to cut down on processing time. This method nevertheless produces only one run output file (apart from the output data files), making it more difficult to find the outputs for each step of the pipeline and for each sample. Therefore, the standard output and error streams are clearly demarcated in order to facilitate spotting and sorting through the output file.

## Results
Example of usage
In order to test the tool, we used publicly available bisulfite sequencing datasets with mouse (GSE56879 (11)) and human (GSE122872 (16)) samples, which were acquired from the European Nucleotide Archive (EBI ENA). Both of these studies are based on the scBS-seq technique (11). Differences in coverage of mtDNA in different cell types can be seen after using MitoCall in Figure 2a and b, showing data from a mouse embryonic stem cell (ESC) and a mouse oocyte cell respectively, with the difference in levels of read coverage consistent with oocytes having significantly higher mitochondrial copy numbers than ESCs (17). Deeper sequenced mouse oocytes were also tested (Figure 2c) and present an improvement in coverage, as expected. Human oocytes (Figure 2d) have similar levels of depth, while presenting with more coverage across the mtDNA. In fact, when using this coverage of the mitochondrial genome to search for some of the most common human mitochondrial disease causing mutations (compiled from research papers, but by no means an exhaustive list), we were able to detect 85% of these positions with a read number ranging between 483 and 916 reads (Table 2). The detection of these mutations will be variable among samples given that cells are sequenced using random primers for amplification, and therefore by chance are likely to amplify different positions with distinct efficiencies and consequently also other base positions that were not detected for this particular sample.

### Validation
Due to the lack of experimental data directly comparing normal and mitochondrial diseased patient single cells, we validated the tool by comparing the number of variants found when using different haplogroups of mice. The focus was mainly on single nucleotide substitutions, and excluded insertions and deletions as these would require stricter quality controls not currently implemented by the tool. The expectation was that mouse strains with haplogroups that would be similar to that of the sample used would show the lowest numbers of variants, while haplogroups that were more distant would show more variants. The sample test that was used came from the publicly available dataset (11) in which a mouse oocyte of the background C57BL/6Babr was sequenced at a greater depth. The variants called for this sample were compared with variants measured for mouse haplogroups C57BL/6NJ and NZO/HiLtJ. As expected, every sample had its own low base level of mutations when compared to the reference genome, C57BL/6J, and the haplogroup C57BL/6NJ.
Still, the number of variants detected was increased when compared to the haplogroup NZO/HiLtJ, with the majority of the variants matching the differences observed when using a BLAST (18) of this genome against the reference genome (Table 3). These validation steps suggest that mutations found in mitochondrial patient cells are likely to be reliably detected, making MitoCall a useful tool for mitochondrial disease studies.

### Limitations
The limitations of this tool are highly dependent on the experimental design prior to sequencing. As expected, the precision of mtDNA heteroplasmy detection and the number of base positions with low number of reads with good quality is determined by the read depth, which is determined both by the sequencing depth and by the overall level of mitochondria present in the sequencing sample, which can vary substantially between tissue and cell type.
Since bisulfite treatment is used to produce the data necessary for MitoCall, certain mutations will not be distinguishable from modifications caused by the experimental steps, and hence heteroplasmy will not be quantifiable for these sites. As shown in Supplementary Table 1, in some of the cases where an alternative base is found, only one strand can be used to calculate the heteroplasmy of that mutation, due to the potential for the other strand being converted by bisulfite treatment, and therefore being unreliable to use in the heteroplasmy calculation. When a position is accessed for its base, only strands aligned in the 3-prime end direction are observed. Hence, for each position, there will be a base representing the forward and the reverse strand. These bases will be dependent on changes that can happen on both strands, yet, it is worth noting that only Cs can be converted to Ts due to bisulfite treatment. Still, according to which strand had the modification due to the treatment or a modification due to a mutation, different changes can be observed for the forward and reverse strands. In some cases, where only one strand is affected by the treatment, only one strand will be reliable to use for calculating heteroplasmy, because the other strand has the possibility of being methylated and it is not possible to distinguish whether it has been methylated in fact or not. This drawback means that values found for the heteroplasmy for these cases will be merely an estimation, and the true heteroplasmy could be, in fact, lower. Unfortunately, for the case of a G (guanine) to C (cytosine) or C to G transition, it is not possible to compute the heteroplasmy of these mutations, since it is not possible to distinguish mutation from methylation. This should not, however, pose a strong limitation to the tool as these nucleotide substitutions do not appear to be common mitochondrial variants as seen in Mitomap(19). In the case of all other mutations such as T (thymine) to A (adenine) and A to T, it is possible to compute an absolute value for heteroplasmy using both strands.
Deletions also cannot be detected with MitoCall. This is a drawback of using left-alignment normalization which removes INDELS (insertions or deletions) that could be present in any mitochondrial sequencing sample.

## Discussion
A highly automated pipeline for detecting mtDNA single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and heteroplasmy analysis from bisulfite sequencing data is currently not available. To address this issue, we developed MitoCall, an effective pipeline which is scalable and customizable according to user’s scientific questions. 
This tool integrates multiple quality control parameters, such as removing probabilistic realignment for the computation of base alignment quality (BAQ), calling variants based on multiallelic calling, and integrating left-alignment and normalisation of mapping in order to improve consistency and reliability of variant calling. These quality controls together with capabilities present in other tools, such as recording forward and reverse allele counts separately (e.g. MitoSeek (10)), and generating a VCF file (e.g. MToolBox (6)), make MitoCall a very useful tool (see Table 1 for further quality controls).
The ability to use this tool to measure mtDNA variants from the same high-throughput data used to measure DNA methylation, and from single cells, opens the opportunity to study the relationship between mitochondria and epigenetics in greater depth. This work has the potential to be useful for further studies involving mitochondrial replacement therapies (MRT) used by mothers who intend to avoid having children which could be carriers of mitochondrial disease-causing genes. Despite being an extremely useful technique, there have been cases of cells after MRT showing signs of its mitochondria reverting to the genetics similar to the mitochondria causing disease, such as the original mitochondrial haplotype (20). This tool makes it possible to study the dynamics of mitochondrial heteroplasmy in cells that have undergone MRT, and investigate whether DNA methylation plays a role in these changes.
This tool brings us a step closer to understanding mitochondrial disease prevalence and its heterogenic mosaic of phenotypes, with the potential to improve diagnosis and prognosis in a clinical setting. With the advent of personalised genomic medicine, the capacity to capture mitochondrial genetic and epigenetic data from a single sequencing sample could have important clinical applications.


## References

1.     Gorman GS, Chinnery PF, DiMauro S, Hirano M, Koga Y, McFarland R, et al. Mitochondrial diseases. Nat Rev Dis Primer. 2016 Dec 22;2(1):16080. 
2.     Fetterman JL, Ballinger SW. Mitochondrial genetics regulate nuclear gene expression through metabolites. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 2019 Aug 6;116(32):15763–5. 
3.     F. C. Lopes A. Mitochondrial metabolism and DNA methylation: a review of the interaction between two genomes. Clin Epigenetics. 2020 Dec;12(1):182. 
4.     Gouil Q, Keniry A. Latest techniques to study DNA methylation. Blewitt M, editor. Essays Biochem. 2019 Dec 20;63(6):639–48. 
5.     Parle-McDermott A. DNA methylation: a timeline of methods and applications. Front Genet. 2011;2(74):13. 
6.     Calabrese C, Simone D, Diroma MA, Santorsola M, Guttà C, Gasparre G, et al. MToolBox: a highly automated pipeline for heteroplasmy annotation and prioritization analysis of human mitochondrial variants in high-throughput sequencing. Bioinformatics. 2014 Nov 1;30(21):3115–7. 
7.     Weissensteiner H, Forer L, Fuchsberger C, Schöpf B, Kloss-Brandstätter A, Specht G, et al. mtDNA-Server: next-generation sequencing data analysis of human mitochondrial DNA in the cloud. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016 Jul 8;44(W1):W64–9. 
8.     Puttick C, Kumar KR, Davis RL, Pinese M, Thomas DM, Dinger ME, et al. mity : A highly sensitive mitochondrial variant analysis pipeline for whole genome sequencing data [Internet]. Bioinformatics; 2019 Nov [cited 2021 Feb 8]. Available from: http://biorxiv.org/lookup/doi/10.1101/852210
9.     Qian Y, Butler TJ, Opsahl-Ong K, Giroux NS, Sidore C, Nagaraja R, et al. fastMitoCalc: an ultra-fast program to estimate mitochondrial DNA copy number from whole-genome sequences. Bioinformatics. 2017;33(9):1399–401. 
10.     Guo Y, Li J, Li C-I, Shyr Y, Samuels DC. MitoSeek: extracting mitochondria information and performing high-throughput mitochondria sequencing analysis. Bioinformatics. 2013 May 1;29(9):1210–1. 
11.     Smallwood SA, Lee HJ, Angermueller C, Krueger F, Saadeh H, Peat J, et al. Single-cell genome-wide bisulfite sequencing for assessing epigenetic heterogeneity. Nat Methods. 2014 Aug;11(8):817–20. 
12.     Krueger F, Andrews SR. Bismark: a flexible aligner and methylation caller for Bisulfite-Seq applications. Bioinformatics. 2011 Jun 1;27(11):1571–2. 
13.     Maude H, Davidson M, Charitakis N, Diaz L, Bowers WHT, Gradovich E, et al. NUMT Confounding Biases Mitochondrial Heteroplasmy Calls in Favor of the Reference Allele. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2019 Sep 25;7:201. 
14.     Danecek P, Schiﬀels S, Durbin R. Multiallelic calling model in bcftools (-m). :2. 
15.     Tan A, Abecasis GR, Kang HM. Unified representation of genetic variants. Bioinformatics. 2015 Jul 1;31(13):2202–4. 
16.     Demond H, Anvar Z, Jahromi BN, Sparago A, Verma A, Davari M, et al. A KHDC3L mutation resulting in recurrent hydatidiform mole causes genome-wide DNA methylation loss in oocytes and persistent imprinting defects post-fertilisation. Genome Med. 2019 Dec;11(1):84. 
17.     Wai T, Ao A, Zhang X, Cyr D, Dufort D, Shoubridge EA. The Role of Mitochondrial DNA Copy Number in Mammalian Fertility1. Biol Reprod. 2010 Jul 1;83(1):52–62. 
18.     Altschul SF, Gish W, Miller W, Myers EW, Lipman DJ. Basic Local Alignment Search Tool. J Mol Biol. 1990;215:403–10. 
19.     Lott MT, Leipzig JN, Derbeneva O, Xie HM, Chalkia D, Sarmady M, et al. mtDNA Variation and Analysis Using Mitomap and Mitomaster. Curr Protoc Bioinforma [Internet]. 2013 Dec [cited 2021 May 28];44(1). Available from: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/0471250953.bi0123s44
20.     Kang E, Wu J, Gutierrez NM, Koski A, Tippner-Hedges R, Agaronyan K, et al. Mitochondrial replacement in human oocytes carrying pathogenic mitochondrial DNA mutations. Nature. 2016 Dec;540(7632):270–5. 


# Acknowledgements

Special thanks go to Prof. Patrick F. Chinnery who helped with the inception of the tool, Thomas B. Barton-Owen for motivational yet critical comments and review of the manuscript drafts, and to Claudia Calabrese for the crucial input during development, and reviewing the final manuscript.


